Update `getting_started` with ADT post-processing (#115)
AlexsLemonade/scpca-docs: docs/getting_started.md

normalized_counts <- logcounts(processed_sce)
```

If you have ADT data from a CITE-seq experiment, you can use the following commands to access raw and normalized ADT count matrices:

```r
# the raw ADT counts matrix stored in the processed object
raw_adt_counts <- counts(altExp(processed_sce))

# log normalized ADT counts matrix stored in the processed object
# if this value is NULL, it means normalization failed
normalized_adt_counts <- logcounts(altExp(processed_sce))

> ```

Reviewer: I think I would prefer to put everything CITE-seq related into a separate section for working with CITE-seq data. So I would move this to the new section you added. There you would include this and then move onto filtering and normalizing.

- [Converting directly from R to Python](https://theislab.github.io/scanpy-in-R/#converting-from-r-to-python)
- [Homepage for scanpy tutorials](https://scanpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorials.html)

## Special considerations for CITE-seq experiments

> If the dataset that you have downloaded contains samples with ADT data from a CITE-seq experiment, the raw and normalized ADT expression matrices are stored in an `altExp` named `"adt"` of the `SingleCellExperiment` object in the `processed.rds` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the dataset you downloaded contains samples with ADT data from a CITE-seq experiment, the raw and normalized ADT expression matrices are stored in as an `altExp` named `"adt"`.
We recommend working with the `SingleCellExperiment` objects stored in the `processed.rds` files as those files contain additional quality control metrics for the CITE-seq experiment:
```
Technically they are in all of the objects, but we want people to work with the processed objects.

```r
# View the ADT alternative experiment
altExp(processed_sce)

# You can also explicitly specify the altexp's name:
altExp(processed_sce, "adt")
```

The following commands can be used to access the ADT expression matrices:

```r
# the raw ADT counts matrix
raw_adt_counts <- counts(altExp(processed_sce))

# the log normalized ADT counts matrix
normalized_adt_counts <- logcounts(altExp(processed_sce))
```

> Be aware that the `SingleCellExperiment` object in the `processed.rds` file was not filtered based on ADT counts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be aware that the `SingleCellExperiment` object in the `processed.rds` file has been filtered to remove low-quality cells based on RNA expression and is not filtered based on ADT counts.
```
I think we should be clear about what is in the processed object and that there is filtering, just not on the ADT matrix.

The `adt_scpca_filter` column indicates which cells should be removed before proceeding with downstream analyses of the ADT data, as determined by [`DropletUtils::CleanTagCounts()](https://rdrr.io/github/MarioniLab/DropletUtils/man/cleanTagCounts.html).
Specifically, this process identified cells with high levels of ambient contamination and/or high levels of negative control ADTs (if available).
Cells are labeled either as `"Keep"` (cells to retain) or `"Remove"` (cells to filter out).

To filter cells based on this column, use the following command:

```r
# Filter cells based on ADT QC statistics
processed_sce <- processed_sce[, which(processed_sce$adt_scpca_filter == "Keep")]
```

The normalized ADT expression matrix only contains values for cells labeled as `"Keep"` in the `adt_scpca_filter` column.
Any cells labeled `"Remove"` have `NA` values in the normalized expression matrix (see {ref}`processed adt data <processing_information:Processed ADT data>` for more details).

> ### Filtering cells based on ADT quality control

Reviewer: I feel like this heading should be moved above line 245, `The `adt_scpca_filter` column indicates`? It seems weird that we talk about filtering but then have a heading that says the same thing?

> In both the `filtered.rds` and `processed.rds` files, quality-control statistics calculated by [`DropletUtils::CleanTagCounts()`](https://rdrr.io/github/MarioniLab/DropletUtils/man/cleanTagCounts.html) are provided in the alternative experiment's `colData` and can be used for filtering.

Reviewer: This is almost a repeat as the same sentence we have above. Also I'm suggesting a little bit of reorganization that I think will make things clearer.
```suggestion
If you are working with the `filtered.rds` file instead of the `processed.rds` file, you can find the same quality-control statistics for ADTs stored in the `colData` of the `altExp`.
However, remember that low-quality cells, as determined by RNA expression or ADT counts, have not been removed from this object. 
We recommend filtering out these low-quality cells before proceeding with normalization and downstream analyses.
```

Author: This suggestion become outdated but I reorganized in the same spirit here! https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-docs/pull/115/commits/c7c78c58632459ae415d591c409ee61b3c9be30e

> To perform the same filtering as we recommended above for the `processed.rds` file, you can use the following command:

Reviewer 2: Do we not have the `adt_scpca_filter` column in the `filtered` data too? I thought that we did, and if so we can suggest using that column instead of `discard` which removes an `altExp()` call.

Author: Yes, it's there! Will update accordingly, thanks

Author: Ah woops, I misread - we do not have this information in `filtered` objects all around.  We only have the `adt_scpca_filter_method`, and similarly for RNA `scpca_filter_method` in the filtered objects. Only the processed objects contain the remove/keep columns.

Author: For reference: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/blob/5765203dfc65c9ee74c4e02c0b98ea0e45ae7fda/bin/post_process_sce.R#L84-L103

Reviewer 2: They _should_ have those columns!

Added here: 
https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/blob/3a8d909e06875349f21e102045e33cae7b85d6fc/bin/post_process_sce.R#L98-L103

Then the filtered files are rewritten out: 
https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/blob/5765203dfc65c9ee74c4e02c0b98ea0e45ae7fda/bin/post_process_sce.R#L237

If they are not appearing in the actual output files, we need to investigate

Author: Oh yeah, I see they're saved into `sce`. Hm!  I'll investigate, 50/50 chance i'm just sleepy.

Author: It is my distinct pleasure to report back that I am sleepy and everything is there! Did you know that the `metadata` and `colData` slots are not the same slot? This is something I _usually_ know ;) 

Sentence update incoming...

```r
# Filter cells based on ADT QC statistics
filtered_sce <- filtered_sce[, which(filtered_sce$adt_scpca_filter == "Keep")]

> ```

Reviewer 2: Just realizing that now these two statements seem a bit oddly ordered since one talks about `altExp` `colData` but then we don't use that information. I might swap the order, so we are talking about the `colData` in the context of custom filtering.

Author: Yeah, that statement made more sense placed there when this code used the `discard` column! I will rearrange text a bit.

- [Converting directly from R to Python](https://theislab.github.io/scanpy-in-R/#converting-from-r-to-python)
- [Homepage for scanpy tutorials](https://scanpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorials.html)

## Special considerations for CITE-seq experiments

> If the dataset you downloaded contains samples with ADT data from a CITE-seq experiment, the raw and normalized ADT expression matrices are stored in as an `altExp` named `"adt"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the dataset you downloaded contains samples with ADT data from a CITE-seq experiment, the raw and normalized ADT expression matrices are stored as an `altExp` named `"adt"`.
```

- [Converting directly from R to Python](https://theislab.github.io/scanpy-in-R/#converting-from-r-to-python)
- [Homepage for scanpy tutorials](https://scanpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorials.html)

## Special considerations for CITE-seq experiments

> If you have ADT data from a CITE-seq experiment, you can use the following commands to access raw and normalized ADT expression matrices in the `processed.rds` file object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the dataset that you have downloaded contains samples with ADT data from a CITE-seq experiment, the raw and normalized ADT expression matrices are stored in the `altExp` of the `SingleCellExperiment` object in the `processed.rds` file.
The following commands can be used to access the ADT expression matrices:
```
Just adding some clarity and using some language regarding downloading samples from the multiplex section.

```r
# the raw ADT counts matrix
raw_adt_counts <- counts(altExp(processed_sce))

# the log normalized ADT counts matrix
# if this value is NULL, it means normalization failed
normalized_adt_counts <- logcounts(altExp(processed_sce))
```

> It is important to be aware that the `SingleCellExperiment` object in the `processed.rds` file was not filtered based on ADT counts, but information that can be used for filtering is  available in the `adt_scpca_filter` column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to be aware that the `SingleCellExperiment` object in the `processed.rds` file was not filtered based on ADT counts.
The `adt_scpca_filter` column indicates which cells should be removed before proceeding with downstream analyses of the ADT data.
```
We might also want to say something about what qualifies cells to be in the `adt_scpca_filter` column as remove? I know you link to the processing information, but it might be helpful to have a one line quick summary here and it can't hurt to repeat yourself in docs.

Cells are labeled either as `"Keep"` (cells to retain) or `"Remove"` (cells to filter out).

To filter cells based on this column, use the following command:
```r
# Filter cells based on ADT QC statistics
processed_sce <- processed_sce[, which(processed_sce$adt_scpca_filter == "Keep")]
```

It is also important to be aware that the normalized ADT expression matrix only contains values for cells labeled as `"Keep"` in the `adt_scpca_filter` column.
Any cells labeled `"Remove"` have `NA` values normalized expression matrix (see

> {ref}`processed cite-seq data <processing_information:Processed CITE-seq data>` for more details).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{ref}`processed adt data <processing_information:Processed ADT data>` for more details).
```
Just thinking we might want to update this to reflect whats happening in #114

As dimension reduction requires all known values (i.e., no `NA`s), filtering cells as shown above is critical before proceeding to downstream analyses on ADT counts.

To perform principal components analysis (PCA) on the ADT counts, use the following `scater` command _after_ filtering has been performed:

```r
# Calculate PCA on the ADT counts
processed_sce <- scater::runPCA(altExp(processed_sce))
```

To perform UMAP on this resulting PCA matrix, use the following `scater` command:

```r
# Calculate UMAP on the ADT counts
processed_sce <- scater::runUMAP(altExp(processed_sce))
```
### Filtering cells based on ADT quality control

In both the `filtered.rds` and `processed.rds` files, cells are flagged for removal based on ADT-level QC statistics in the alternative experiment's `discard` column as calculated by [`DropletUtils::CleanTagCounts()](https://rdrr.io/github/MarioniLab/DropletUtils/man/cleanTagCounts.html).
This column contains values `FALSE` for cells that should not be removed and `TRUE` for cells that should be removed.

> To filter cells based on ADT counts, for example in the `filtered.rds` object, use the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If starting with the `filtered.rds` file instead, cells will need to be filtered based on ADT counts using the following commands:
```
Following what we say in the docs for normal libraries, we mention the "if you are working with filtered data" so I think we should follow a similar approach here.

```r
# First, you can see cells should be removed (`TRUE`) vs. kept (`FALSE`)
altExp(filtered_sce)$discard

# Filter cells based on ADT QC statistics
filtered_sce <- filtered_sce[, -which(altExp(filtered_sce)$discard)]
```

### Normalizing ADT counts

The `filtered.rds` object contains a raw ADT counts matrix, but not a matrix of log normalized ADT expression.
To perform normalization yourself, we first recommend filtering cells using the `filtered_sce$discard` column, as shown above, to reduce the chances of normalization failing as described in

> {ref}`processed cite-seq data <processing_information:Processed CITE-seq data>`.

Reviewer: Just noting this also needs to have an updated link

Author: done in https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-docs/pull/115/commits/9ae14dea04d52044798f3073511855bb71c8ba04

Normalization can then be performed with `scuttle` and `scater`:

```r
# Calculate size factors for use in ADT normalization,
# using the previously-calculated ambient profile
altExp(filtered_sce) <- scuttle::computeMedianFactors(
  altExp(filtered_sce),
  reference = metadata(altExp(filtered_sce))$ambient_profile
)

# Normalize and log transform
# This will only succeed if all size factors calculated above are positive
altExp(filtered_sce) <- scater::logNormCounts(altExp(filtered_sce))
```

> 

Reviewer: Maybe just a statement saying you can now proceed with dimensionality reduction as above?

Author: done in https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-docs/pull/115/commits/9ae14dea04d52044798f3073511855bb71c8ba04

- [Converting directly from R to Python](https://theislab.github.io/scanpy-in-R/#converting-from-r-to-python)
- [Homepage for scanpy tutorials](https://scanpy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorials.html)

## Special considerations for CITE-seq experiments

> 

Author: Is this suggestion meant to be different? Right now it's the same.

> If the dataset that you have downloaded contains samples with ADT data from a CITE-seq experiment, the raw and normalized ADT expression matrices are stored in the `altExp` of the `SingleCellExperiment` object in the `processed.rds` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the dataset that you have downloaded contains samples with ADT data from a CITE-seq experiment, the raw and normalized ADT expression matrices are stored in an `altExp` of the `SingleCellExperiment` object in the `processed.rds` file.
```

The following commands can be used to access the ADT expression matrices:

```r
# the raw ADT counts matrix

> raw_adt_counts <- counts(altExp(processed_sce))

Author: I do think we should probably mention the name of the altExp, even if we don't include this explicit code.

> raw_adt_counts <- counts(altExp(processed_sce))

Author: I didn't accept this, but I added code to show how to access the `altExp` with(out) `"adt"` which I think gets the job done.

To filter cells based on this column, use the following command:
```r
# Filter cells based on ADT QC statistics
processed_sce <- processed_sce[, which(processed_sce$adt_scpca_filter == "Keep")]
```

It is also important to be aware that the normalized ADT expression matrix only contains values for cells labeled as `"Keep"` in the `adt_scpca_filter` column.
Any cells labeled `"Remove"` have `NA` values normalized expression matrix (see
{ref}`processed adt data <processing_information:Processed ADT data>` for more details).

As dimension reduction requires all known values (i.e., no `NA`s), filtering cells as shown above is critical before proceeding to downstream analyses on ADT counts.

To perform principal components analysis (PCA) on the ADT counts, use the following `scater` command _after_ filtering has been performed:

```r
# Calculate PCA on the ADT counts
processed_sce <- scater::runPCA(altExp(processed_sce))
```

To perform UMAP on this resulting PCA matrix, use the following `scater` command:

```r
# Calculate UMAP on the ADT counts
processed_sce <- scater::runUMAP(altExp(processed_sce))

> ```

Reviewer 2: I don't know if we want to encourage people to do PCA & UMAP on the ADT counts alone. I don't think that this is a required part of a "getting started" doc, and I would probably just remove it.

Author: Ok, I might wait for a little discussion on this (maybe we can all chat next week!), since this was specifically added because of comments from Ally who is out right now. We'll regroup!

Reviewer: I was only suggesting adding this to mirror the docs that we have for getting started with RNA. I've definitely seen PCA and UMAP on ADT's alone so don't think that's entirely crazy, but I think it's a question of how much we want to suggest. I think Josh has a point that we may not need to suggest it and maybe don't want to if that's something we haven't really had experience with ourselves. So I'm fine with removing it.

To filter cells based on this column, use the following command:
```r
# Filter cells based on ADT QC statistics
processed_sce <- processed_sce[, which(processed_sce$adt_scpca_filter == "Keep")]
```

It is also important to be aware that the normalized ADT expression matrix only contains values for cells labeled as `"Keep"` in the `adt_scpca_filter` column.
Any cells labeled `"Remove"` have `NA` values normalized expression matrix (see
{ref}`processed adt data <processing_information:Processed ADT data>` for more details).

As dimension reduction requires all known values (i.e., no `NA`s), filtering cells as shown above is critical before proceeding to downstream analyses on ADT counts.

To perform principal components analysis (PCA) on the ADT counts, use the following `scater` command _after_ filtering has been performed:

```r
# Calculate PCA on the ADT counts
processed_sce <- scater::runPCA(altExp(processed_sce))
```

To perform UMAP on this resulting PCA matrix, use the following `scater` command:

```r
# Calculate UMAP on the ADT counts
processed_sce <- scater::runUMAP(altExp(processed_sce))
```
### Filtering cells based on ADT quality control

> In both the `filtered.rds` and `processed.rds` files, cells are flagged for removal based on ADT-level QC statistics in the alternative experiment's `discard` column as calculated by [`DropletUtils::CleanTagCounts()](https://rdrr.io/github/MarioniLab/DropletUtils/man/cleanTagCounts.html).

Author: Simplified - https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-docs/pull/115/commits/cfc745393f0f3e58d2bdf532c7aebac88f031b32

This column contains values `FALSE` for cells that should not be removed and `TRUE` for cells that should be removed.

If starting with the `filtered.rds` file instead, cells will need to be filtered based on ADT counts using the following commands:

```r
# First, you can see cells should be removed (`TRUE`) vs. kept (`FALSE`)

> altExp(filtered_sce)$discard

Reviewer 2: Meant to include this in my earlier review, but let's not encourage people to print a _very_ long vector?

Author: I modified this section, for now, to be less prescriptive about `discard` and therefore this code example is also incidentally removed https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-docs/pull/115/commits/cfc745393f0f3e58d2bdf532c7aebac88f031b32

In both objects, you can see cells flagged for removal based on ADT-level QC statistics in the alternative experiment's `discard` column as calculated by [`DropletUtils::CleanTagCounts()](https://rdrr.io/github/MarioniLab/DropletUtils/man/cleanTagCounts.html), where `TRUE` indicates the cell should be removed.

```r
# See which cells should be removed (`TRUE`) vs. kept (`FALSE`)
# This column is in both `filtered.rds` and `processed.rds`:
altExp(filtered_sce)$discard
altExp(processed_sce)$discard
```

To filter cells based on this column, use the following command, for example on `filtered_sce`:
```r
# Filter cells based on ADT-level QC statistics
filtered_sce <- filtered_sce[, -which(altExp(filtered_sce)$discard)]
```

In the `processed.rds` object specifically, this information is also recorded as values `"Remove"` and `"Keep"`:

```r
# See which cells should be removed vs. kept in `processed.rds`
processed_sce$adt_scpca_filter
```

To filter cells based on this column, use the following command:
```r
# Filter cells based on ADT-level QC statistics
processed_sce <- processed_sce[, which(processed_sce$adt_scpca_filter ==  "Keep")]

> ```

Reviewer: I think I would refer to this first and then say that you can also do the same by using the `discard` column. I would emphasize using this column and what's in this column more than using the `altExp` `colData`.

### Normalizing ADT counts

The `filtered.rds` object contains a raw ADT counts matrix, but not a matrix of log normalized ADT expression.
To perform normalization yourself, we first recommend filtering cells flagged for removal by ADT-level QC statistics to reduce the chances of normalization failing, as described above.

Normalization can then be performed with `scuttle` and `scater`:

```r
# Calculate size factors for use in ADT normalization,
# using the previously-calculated ambient profile
altExp(filtered_sce) <- scuttle::computeMedianFactors(
  altExp(filtered_sce),
  reference = metadata(altExp(filtered_sce))$ambient_profile
)

# Normalize and log transform
# This step will only succeed if all size factors calculated above are positive
altExp(filtered_sce) <- scater::logNormCounts(altExp(filtered_sce))
```

A normalized expression matrix is also provided in the `processed.rds` object, containing values for all cells which are indicated as `"Keep"` in the `processed_sce$adt_scpca_filter` column and `NA` for all cells indicated as `"Remove"`:

```r
# Access log normalized ADT expression matrix
logcounts(altExp(processed_sce))

> ```

Reviewer: I would also switch this. Talk about the `processed.rds` file first and then you can say if instead you are working with the `filtered.rds` file this is what you would do. We want people to use the `processed.rds` file. Also this should be a follow up from the previous step so you filtered and now you have the normalized data. What would you do with that normalized data? We talk about PCA/UMAP in the RNA section, so perhaps you could mention or show commands for how you would calculate PCA/UMAP for just the ADT information.

Reviewer: I would move everything related to working with the filtered file to a separate sub-section and have the main section be the flow you would follow if you had just downloaded the processed file.
